---
title: Reflection of Project
---

## Lessons Learned
In Team 204 we all can agree, that the experience of working on this project turned out to be both challening and particularly educative, sometimes even in ways we haven't quite expected it to be. Here we present the top 10 most important things that we learned about the process of designing an Embedded System from this project:<br>
1) **PCB - first!** This project has clearly demonstrated us, that there is no stronger fundament for programm/code configuration works than a tested and operation-verified Printed Circuit Board. Yes, a team member can have his/her susbsystem flawlessly functioning within a breadboard setup, but once the time comes to transfing it into the form of a PCB, a single faulty connection or a wrong on-surface trace placement can significantly slow down, if not ruin(!) all further system integration and set-up works. On our own experience, we've discorvered that it is crucial to finish PCB design and correlated operation verification testings as early as possible throughout the project development timeline. Operation-confirmed and working PCB is easily a half of the project's success!<br>
2) **Sometimes, datasheet is the best advisor!** Many problems could have been avoided if more attention was put towards examining, exploring and interpreting datahseets in a right manner. Probably one of the most significant examples in support of this conclusion would be a 3-week delay, that happened with the process of configuring the project's sensor subsystem due to a single misinterpretation of the target sensor's I2C device adress! Making sure that you have understood and correctly interpreted the datasheet, is one of the largest, is not a central key to success in configuring your target electrical/electromechanical component<br>
3) **Knowing how to debug is almost important as knowing how to code!** From the perspective of a project's end, we can definitely admit, that a lot of time could have been "saved" back at the active development period, if only we began to use the debugging tools earlier, than when we actually decided to. A conclusion like this is rational both to "internal", through-code debugging using tools like MPLAB Snap, and "external", based on oscilloscope probing and multimeter measurements. We want to particularly mention the value of Oscilloscope - considering how much our project relies on various types of serial communication, this tool simply doesn't have alternatives, that could handle the task of analyzing the communication sequences in such practical manner. Learning how to thoroughly use this tool ended up being no less than **crucial** to the configuration of some of our subsystems<br>
4) **Always plan ahead and keep in mind an approximate problem-solving strategy** before starting to complete the working task, even if it seems relatively easy to complete!<br>
5) **Learning more about the target programming environment is never a bad idea!** Being able to fluently code in target programming language/framework is optional, but almost always significantly simplifies your programming experience and is capable of solving a lot of potentially-wasted time<br>
6) **PCB design is a perfect case of "better safe than sorry"!** Always try to eliminate as many potential signal/power transfer issues as possible at the stage of PCB design. Sure, you can always perform countless soldering adjustments, but after you get your PCB, its internal structure is "set in stone", and you can't do nothing about it<br>
7) **Soldering must be treated with extreme care and caution!** A single proper soldering session can save enormous amount of time on post-soldering testings and fixing the soldering defects<br>
8) **Constantly keeping in touch with your teammates on the topic of inter-team communications and messaging format is crucial to the project's success!** It will be really sad, if on the demo day the team will find out that team member #3 cannot receive proper information from team member #1, because one month ago the first team member decided to change the format of a specific "single use" message without notifying the others <br>
9) **Proper communication and knowledge sharing always rewards!** Exchanging with your peers the information known over a problem can be as helpful as searching for information online or asking for help on online forums<br>
10) **Internet is always your very last hope**. Do not hesistate to browse your problematic question as deep and broad as possible, as sometimes the perfect solution might be waiting you in the most unexpected places ever!<br>

## Recommendations for Future Students
This class had a lot of challenges in it that our team had to overcome to get our project to where it was and we learned a lot of lessons along the way. Some recommendations that we have for future students would be to really plan ahead, schedule out your time, go to office hours, communicate with your team all the time, and do your research and read the instructions.

Our team really benefited from not having to change our project much in its design from the concept this allowed us to focus more on unexpected hardware or software problems rather than dealing with problems with our concept and its execution. We thought out how our device would work really early on in the stage and how each subsystem would fit into it. This allowed us to plan out our PCBs to work together like how we did for making our PCBs the same size with holes so we could stack them to work for our design. Planning ahead especially for when PCB construction is essential to getting a working team device. We weren’t perfect on our planning ahead and still had to deal with some problems mostly with our PCB designs but we definitely benefited from all the parts we planned ahead on and future students should plan ahead as much as possible.

Another thing that our team learned is scheduling out your time. We learned that it's important to schedule out our time. Whether its for weekly team meetings or time to work together on a problem our team benefited from it and future students would succeed better if they scheduled out their time especially if they could start working on areas sooner like working on code with a dev kit before their PCB arrives to allow for debugging time because problems could take weeks to fix as our team learned and also accounting for the time it takes to manufacture PCBs and put parts on and fix hardware issues when the PCB arrives so it would be good for a future student to plan out their time to get as much time to work on their PCB as possible.

Speaking of debugging issues, going to office hours is another big recommendation that we have for future students. Our team greatly benefited from going to office hours as working with the professors and the TAs helped us figure out our problems and learn a lot of useful skills about debugging, soldering, coding, and best practices that we would not have learned in class otherwise. We believe that future students could also benefit from these skills that we had learned by going to office hours as they will help us with projects in the future both in school and industry.

Communicating with your team is another recommendation for future students. Our team planned out time once or twice a week for at least an hour where our team could get together and talk about where we are at and who needs help with what. This allowed us to better organize our time and complete our assignments quicker and better as we would always talk about what we need to do and how to do it. When it came to debugging meeting up with our team and communicating with each other greatly helped because if one of us did not know how to do something there was a good chance that someone else did or that they knew someone who would know the answer and it helped us improve our project overall. 

A last recommendation for future students would be to do your research. A lot of component selection and PCB design comes before you have any physical part or maybe aren’t 100% sure on where your project is heading but doing research on parts and reading the datasheets for all the parts is very important and often overlooked especially during coding. When dealing with different hardware while coding you might have to initialize things a certain way or there might be multiple address for a device with I2C which can all be found in the datasheet and our team did miss at first glance but found on deeper dives into the datasheets. Also reading all the instructions in the assignments and projects and familiarizing yourself with them is another recommendation so that nothing gets missed while doing an assignment.


We believe that with these recommendations a student can come out of the class successful with new skills and have a good and complete project.

## Designing the Version 2.0
If we were to make a second version of our communication protocol we would change our variables for changing distance and speed to allow any value within 0 to 100 instead of using increments of 20 for it. Right now we are using increments of 20 for both the speed and the distance even though for distance we do not need to but for the speed we needed to. We needed to do this because of the way our API is sent up with the ESP 32 which runs our motor system and how it right now is not set up to take in hex values which is what our API ran on the PIC is set up to send. The PIC is used for both the sensor system and the HMI system which is why we are able to output and receive hex values for our data but right now for both the MQTT and the motor it has to be in increments of 20. Upgrading this system would allow the user greater control over the device and allow for quicker processing of the message on the ESP side since it would only have to read the hex value instead of looking for each message case.

Some ways that we could also improve debuggability within our system is by having each system send a debug message to the HMI system to display it on the OLED screen allowing us to read the message. This could also be a feature setup on the OLED screen or even the MQTT system to allow us to just see messages passing or being sent without having to disable all of the other functions and redownload new debugging specific code. 

Something else that we would like to do if we had another version would be to have a control system on the motors so that the acceleration and deceleration of the device as it starts moving towards and approaches its desired distance is smooth and the bot does not have quickly move which could damage the structure of the device or even the motors over time. This would have to be code added into the motor subsystem where it knows what the designated distance is and also the real distance and as it gets closer to the target it slows itself down or as it starts to move it slowly ramps up its speed so that it can smoothly reach full speed. This would add greater stability, more reliability and an improved lifespan for the device.

We believe that if we could make a second version these are just some of the improvements that would help us have a better project that could better fulfill our proposed design.

